Chris?
Yes, I'm here. I'm sorry, mark.
No, no, no, my dear. No, no. Thank you so much.
We, we will continue. We'd love to hear from you.
We're just having some cl um, staffing issues you might say,
which will, um, be amended as we speak.
So please, your time is precious.
Thank you so much for your time.
I look forward to your submission.
Um, we have you for five minutes,
and please, if you want some questions,
leave a bit of time at the end.
That's lovely. Thank you so much. Carry on.
Um, you want me to talk now quickly?
Yes, please, please. Okay, thank you sir.
Um, so my name is Isabel. I'm, um, German born.
I'm been 20 years in New Zealand.
I'm having a little micro farm in the southern part
of Auckland and Papino.
And, um, I do have plenty animals, um, myself here for,
um, pleasure pets, but also for eating.
I do have, uh, pigs.
I have cows, sheep, uh, horse and other animals.
And, um, the reason I was encouraged by a friend of,
um, as I've been very well traveled around the world
as well, so I've seen other cultures,
how they're treating their animals
and how they, um, you know, caring for their animals,
but also for the purpose of eating.
And, um, I, I can see
how important it is for those animals
to have the right environment and the right space.
And, um, for me, I've seen some, um,
farms in Germany where the animals are very caged
and, um, being caged to the time they're being slaughtered.
And those animals are very intelligent animals. Yeah.
So a putting a, a pig
and a cage is, is, uh, that they have a very, um,
a social environment.
They're very social animals.
My pig, she doesn't like to be alone.
She, she prefers to be with other pigs or with a sheep,
or with a, with a horse.
She made very friend with them.
Um, she's a very lovely animal. She listens.
She's a very hygienic,
she uses her toilet area she would never poop in, in, in
or around our house.
Um, when she started nesting,
when she started having her babies, her, her piglets,
she was taking so much care of them.
And I had a very high yield twice a year.
And, um, for me,
if I would see my pick being in a cage for most
of a lifetime, taking care
of something which could be different, kind of prevented,
like I gave her a safe environment for the piglets
and safe environment with the piglets,
then could go into a heated corner.
Um, what I also seen of gym farms is that, um,
after a couple of years, the yield of piglets, um, drop down
and then they get, uh, slaughtered.
However, if it would give them again,
the space they started producing even more.
So catching them puts the yield actually, the,
the expectation of piglets down.
But if you give them the right environment with a, with a
right lightning and space to run
and roam, um, you will have a higher yield of that one.
So it is, and how do I explain it?
It doesn't make sense to me to catch an animal,
which is definitely not being built in its brain being, um,
being uncaged up.
It's, I think it's squirrel.
It, it's, it's, um, un unhuman doing it for the sakes
of, um, saving some piglets
or also the, um, uh,
the animals getting earlier sick, needing more antibiotics
and bowel cages, they suffering from tumors, internal tumors
and, um, um, um, joint fractures and,
and joint, um, uh, problems.
So, which then goes into the next generation.
So I don't see the point of doing that
and implementing that one in New Zealand.
While we do have the space here, we do have the space
and we can make it, um, animal fair.
Well done. No, uh, Isabelle, um,
I think you've done very well.
Being multilingual is always difficult,
and, uh, I think you've expressed yourself beautifully.
Thank you. Um, no, no, thank you.
We've, my members are very grateful
for your insights very quickly.
When you say yield, do you mean that they would, if you were
a farmer growing pork for Yeah.
Consumption, yes.
That, that their growing times would be longer
and their yield would be down.
Is that what you are saying?
I would say if the, an animals would have the possibility
of being in a natural habitat, they would have more piglets
with a healthier meat growing faster,
being locked up and being suppressed from sunlight.
They, they do need the sunlight, the red infrared light
as much as we need it.
Mm-hmm. To that the contra, um, that our cells
and also the pig cells can grow healthier and better meet,
But very good, very, it's a very interesting, um, angle.
People haven't spoken about that.
Um, Isabel, thank you so much. We've met time this morning.
I think that's a really great submission.
I'm very grateful for your time
and I hope you have a wonderful day.
Thank you. Um, just
to the parliamentary team of, uh, sorry, uh, those
that are working in parliament, the clerks we have
next, we have a next submitter.
Yeah. Linley Hunter.
Ah, brilliant. So we moved straight.
We we're sort of jumping around, but, okay, thanks.
A, thanks a million. We'll move across to Linley Hunter,
Can you just, uh, let her know
that she needs to accept the promotion?
Yes. Sorry, sorry. Linley, it's Mark Cameron from the, um,
from the primary production select committee.
Can you please accept, um, I believe it's called a promotion
to just put yourself in
so we can have a conversation with you.
She's just coming online now.
Thank you. Thanks. Thanks.
See you guys are doing stellar work. Thank you.
Hello Linley. Can you hear me at all?
Linley, it's Mark Cameron from the
primary production select committee.
You there?
It's coming through now.
Get her to come in. Linley, are you able
to accept the invite so we can hear from you?
Hey, team, we, we we're having communication issues
with this submitter, I think.
Can we perhaps move on to Michelle Evans and, and and
We've actually got Graham Hanson online,
Right? Well, let's
go to Graham. Graham.
Is that correct? Is it Graham?
Yeah, we'll just bring him online now.
Very good.
Graham,
are you there?
Sorry, Graham, we're having,
Can you hear me now?
Yes, sir. I can hear you. How are you?
I'm good, thank you. Brilliant.
We can see you both, we can both, uh, see you
and hear you Graham, thank you, um, for being online.
Sorry for the technicality issues
or technical issues should I say?
Um, great to have you online. We have you for five minutes.
I leave, um, I will leave it with you
to make your submission
and then we might have
some questions at the end if you allow us a moment or two.
Yes. Okay. Uh, good morning chairperson.
Thank you for taking the time to read my submission
and allowing me to speak today.
I'd like to introduce you myself quickly.
Um, I have design engineer
and have always
had an interest in ala animal welfare.
Though I'm representing myself as an individual
and have no links to any organizations
or businesses that may conflict.
Okay. Um, putting aside the debate on animal cruelty,
firstly, I want to focus on the legitimacy of the legitimacy
of the proposed amendment of the Animal Welfare Act.
Okay. A quick summary of the facts.
You probably already know these,
but just so you understand that.
I understand. Okay.
A quick summary of the facts as I understand them.
In two 18, a small group from the agriculture industry
persuaded the agriculture minister
to bring in new animal welfare standards.
These standards failed to consider important provisions
in the Animal Welfare Act.
These welfare standards were successfully challenged in two
20 when the high court handed down a ruling stating
that it was unlawful.
This was followed by urgent regulations on faring crates
and mating stalls being created
and agreed phase out period in place move on five years.
And little has been done
by consecutive agriculture ministers to abide
by the two 20 court ruling.
Covering government is now proposing a fast track type
amendment to the animal welfare act
that will make the unlawful activities lawful.
Okay, so these are following now is my thoughts. Okay.
I strongly believe this action is a dangerous step in the
erosion of our country's democratic system.
If it passes into law, it may well set a basis
for future rushed law changes.
New Zealand has an established
and robust justice system designed to up po rights
and enforcing the laws that our society is based upon.
Our courts provide the necessary checks
and bounds to ensure differences are settled.
And justices minimized and wrong decisions corrected.
The two 18 decision made by the government on the day
to amend the annual Welfare Act was one
of those wrong decisions.
And in 2020,
the high court handed down a ruling stating such.
So, according to recent stats, there seems
to be less than a hundred registered farm pig farms in
New Zealand, and
that number has been declining year on year.
This is all, this is subjective.
This isn't an industry that appears to be struggling
to remain relevant.
Domestic and export sales are in decline while increased
pork arriving on our doors.
Any attempt to compete against large industrial
international players as futile
offshore factory pork farming is on a scale
that absolutely dwarfs New Zealand's outputs,
and we can never compete on price.
Okay. Submitting a bill to amend your,
the annual welfare rate under urgency appears deceitful.
If the government and the pork industry feel the two 20 high
court decision was wrong, then use the appropriate channels,
go to the appeals court, followed by the Supreme Court.
If the appeal is successful, don't back.
The current coalition government does not have a mandate
to amend the Animal Welfare Act.
And if anything should be upholding your recommendations
from 2020 and encouraging global trends
and good pig farming practices.
Allowing this bill to proceed is sending a clear message
that if you are committing unlawful acts
and you get caught, just amend the current law
to make your unlawful acts lawful.
New Zealand is often portrayed
and perceived globally as a clean green country.
That is where the potential to add value
to our export products lies.
Happy pigs equals happy pork buyers
equals higher expert dollars equals happy farmers
and happy government.
There are claims the cost to individual farmers to remove
or modify fairing crates
and mating stores to comply
with the Animal Welfare Act are excessive
with the result being real hardship.
Here's a suggestion,
let's stop kicking the can down the road.
Redirect resources currently being used
to hastily rewrite the law
and create a subsidy scheme to support a fair transition
to a kinder way of farming pigs.
Um, I, as I said earlier, I am a design engineer.
Um, I'm more than happy to work with people to try
and come up with a solution, the mechanical side of it,
to come up with a solution that all parties are happy with.
Um, thank you for your time today.
Thank you, Graham. We've met time.
I, I, I, um, I apologize for being so, uh,
or the brevity you might say of this process, um,
and how quickly, uh, it sort of comes
to an end once it's started.
We have many submissions to hear today,
so thank you for yours.
We're very grateful for yours.
Um, it will certainly go into the, the,
the parliamentary diary as it were,
and we can digest what all the thoughts
and ideas of our constituents are.
So thank you very much, sir. Thank you.
Makes us, uh, um, uh,
helps us make informed decisions,
so thank you very much. Thank
You very much. Bye-bye.
So take Cheerio. So team, we now go to, is it Elle Evans?
We were after Linley Hunter, is that correct? Uh, Mr.
Chair, we've got Linley Hunter online.
Great. We can go straight into Linley Hunter then.
Linley. Morning, are you there?
Hello? Hello, Linley,
it's Mark Cameron from the primary
production select committee.
Uh, I'm sorry for my appearance.
I'm sitting in a motor vehicle, um, as farmers
and as parliamentarians.
Were all over the country currently, so apologies for that.
I'll leave it with you. We have you for five. No worries.
Looking forward to your submission
and, um, let's have a chat
and then maybe we can have some questions at the end.
Okay. I'll just wonder where there isn't a light
behind me there. Um,
That's quite alright. I
Don't really, I don't really like to submit online.
I hate it, I have to tell you. So
That's alright. Feel
that it's really important
to take part in democratic process.
Yes, of course. I'm a grandmother of two little girls.
I'm a retired science and maths teacher. Mm-hmm.
Um, a previous life form, I worked in biomedical research
and we used animals for the research.
And I'm not a vegan or a vegetarian.
I happily eat meat,
but I expect all animals to be treated humanely,
whether they're our pets, whether they're farm animals,
whether they're, um, our own native species.
If we had pet breeders kept cats
and dogs, um, like these pigs are being kept, they'd be
fined and jailed for treating animals so disrespectfully.
And similarly, if I treated my pets in such a way
I'd be fined or jailed.
Someone once said, we can judge a society
by the way we treat our animals.
And I believe that's true.
Pigs are highly intelligent
and social animals, like we heard from the, uh, lady just
before, they make loyal pets and are easily trained.
They are sentient beings.
They feel and they have emotions.
Their wellbeing should not be sacrificed for our profit,
what sheep prices for pork.
We already have the legislation in place to, um,
phase out this, these pro practices by the end of this year.
And I see no need to make any changes to that.
I'm always happy to pay a premium price for humanely
for reduced meat.
And I think that that's a a, a price difference point
of difference for New Zealand farmers is
that we do have humanely produced food in this country.
Um, just wanna say also
that I consider this whole process to be a waste
of everyone's time.
Yours, mine, all the other presenters, um,
where we have a sham democracy
where select committee recommendations are completely
ignored by our government
and the wishes
of the people are also completely ignored by the government.
But I think it's really important for us to continue
to have our say and to continue to stand up for the things
that we believe in, even if we know
that it's not gonna make a damn difference to
what these people, um, uh, end up voting on.
Um, I agree totally with everything
that the previous speaker said about, um,
sorry, lost the thought,
but I totally, yeah, what he said about,
Sorry, please, by all means, carry on.
I think Isabel Stubbs
before was, uh, uh, basically saying what you're saying
that the animal welfare is very,
very salient in this issue and Yeah.
Should be considered. Yep.
Yes. Uh, he, uh, you know, that comes ahead
of us being able to afford,
have cheap, cheap meat, you know?
Yes, of course. Yeah.
Um, but in, in terms of the, you know, the, the way
that legislation is being rushed through in this country
and things without due process and with that,
and this bill is being put forward rather than following the
proper processes through the, through the court system is,
is also of, um, you know, extreme concern to,
um, all of us out here.
So thank you. That's all I need to say.
Well, thank you Linley. I mean, um,
do we have any questions for this lovely
submitter while we're online?
Uh, do there appear to be none Nette? I just wanna one Yeah.
Make one remark. I I have every faith in the Democratic
process and I Good.
I, I think that we are having a discussion today
proves that very point.
And, um, quite often, uh, legislation is amended on the back
of advice that we get from those
that are more informed than us in our
society and constituency.
Yeah. So thank you for your time.
I hope, I hope that's true. Helps us
make informed decisions.
So thank you very much. Have a good day. Yep,
You too. Thanks very much
for your time. Thank
You. No, no, thank you. Yours,
cheerio. Thanks.
Bye-bye. Byebye, uh,
we now have Elle Evans, is that right?
Koto? I'm here. Hello. Hello. Is it Elle Evans?
I hope I pronounced that correctly.
Yes, you have. Thanks, mark.
No, no. Well, lovely to have you on board
and, um, I'll leave it with you.
We have you for five minutes. Please by all means.
Uh, tell us what you think
and, um, uh, if you could leave some time for questions,
if you want them at the end, that would be great.
Okay. Thank you for that. Um, Koto, I just want
to acknowledge that for accessibility reasons,
I'll be presenting with my camera off,
but my photo is visible.
Oh, great. Um, So my submission is grounded in over two
decades of professional experience across the mental health
and criminal justice sectors.
Before I begin, when I speak about farmers
or industry, I am not implying that all are abusive.
However, after years of public education
and scientific evidence, ignorance is no longer an excuse.
Those who continue
to defend these harmful practices are actively choosing
profit over animal and human wellbeing.
I strongly oppose this bill.
This bill says a great deal about who we are as a nation.
It, it is a clear indication that we're willing
to turn a blind eye to extreme animal and human suffering.
Given the short time I have,
I will focus on two key neglected issues.
The psychological violence inflicted on the public
and the systemic failure
of enforcement and judicial fairness.
Harm to animals does not occur in isolation
from harm to humans.
For many people, witnessing
or knowing about the systemic cruelty creates secondary
trauma and produces a psychological injury.
The industry has no right to burden the public
with the psychological cost of their failure to comply.
The cost of this trauma is being transferred onto us.
When we speak of family violence, we include physical,
sexual, and psychological violence.
Psychological violence can cause more
harm than physical violence.
Our family violence act already defines psychological abuse
to include the ill treatment of pets
and other animals whose welfare
affects a person's wellbeing.
This provision recognizes the suffering of sentient beings
and its impact on humans.
The cruelty sanctioned by this bill
as a national scale perpetration psychological violence.
It is clear that animal welfare can detrimentally
impact people's mental health.
However, there has been no public response from the Minister
of Mental Health slamming this bill.
This is deeply concerning.
I can say without hesitation that suicidal ideation,
self-harm, and substance abuse has increased
as a direct result of this bill.
This alone demands immediate attention along
with the Minister of mental health.
The New Zealand police appear
to have been absent from this conversation.
Yet an alarming consequence
of this bill's controversial nature
is the high level of public anger.
It's causing this intense frustration can lead
to displaced anger and an escalation in family violence.
Therefore, it is essential that police
and social service agencies are preparing
for a potential increase in family violence.
The bill seeks to enable a transition,
but farmers have already had five years
if they haven't converted.
Despite a high court ruling in public pressure,
what is twice that amount of time going to achieve.
This is not a natural disaster like the
Christchurch Earthquakes.
This is a disgusting human-centered tragedy.
This is not only a failure of the industry,
but a failure of the state.
It's completely absurd that MPI
who have failed in its monitoring
and enforcement responsibilities, the decades
is still the one responsible for the industry.
The structural failure must be addressed.
Before I present my recommendations, I encourage you
to consider policing priorities.
In the February raid on Paul Smith, widely known as Gandalf,
the Green Ferry, significant law enforcement resources were
used to destroy a medicinal cannabis operation that
provided affordable relief to hundreds
of vulnerable patients.
Yet an ongoing breach of ethical standards
that causes profound harm to both animals
and humans is met with silence and inaction.
I question why the same level
of commitment is not directed at protecting sentient beings
from sanctioned abuse.
The police must demonstrate a consistent approach
to enforcement and visit each indoor pig farm
and dismantle the farrowing crates.
The instruments suffering.
They should commence immediately
following the 18th of December. Deadline
Lashelle, I don't mean to interrupt you,
but we do only have a five minute slot, so if you would be
so kind to be succinct, that would be great.
Yep. I'm up to my recommendations now.
Thank you. Given the catastrophic failure of policy
and enforcement, I suggest the following.
In addition to what I've already recommended,
implement an urgent social impact assessment,
include violence against farm animals under the direct
mandate of the police, and create lived experiences
for pig farmers and others who are defending the use
of faring crates dictate
that those involved in perpetuating this crisis
complete a learning opportunity
where they experience exactly the same conditions
as the mother pigs and piglets for multiple days.
In conclusion, the situation is not just a failure
of policy, it is a profound indictment on our society.
This is a contemptible legislative offense.
By recommending this bill proceed,
you'll be endorsing a deliberate extension
of extreme suffering, both animal torture
and the psychological harm caused to people.
I urge this committee to bring an immediate end to the use
of farrowing crates and mating
stills. Thank you for your time.
No, Michelle, thank you for yours.
We're very grateful for it.
I'm sorry we've met time
and we won't be able to afford you any questions,
but thank you for your submission.
We're very grateful, uh, and I hope you have a great day.
Thank you, mark. And I'd be happy to speak to any
of the committee at another date in terms
of advice or Yeah. Support.
Absolute, absolutely. We, we may well very well afford,
um, several people that opportunity, so thank you. Okay,
Thank you. You
take care. Have a great day.
Uh, we are now moving across to Bridget Thompson from 1105
to 1110.
So we have Bridget for five minutes.
Uh, hello. Thank you for this opportunity.
Um, I, um, I agree with, um, the previous speaker
that I feel quite cynical about, um, the likelihood
that this will change, um, what is already in motion.
Um, but I do believe in, um, actually speaking
to thank you for that.
Um, I was, um, broadsided by this bill as many people were.
Um, you know, five years ago, um, the government had,
had signaled the end to, um, uh, creating one
of the most egregious, uh, elements of, um,
agricultural practice in New Zealand.
There are many, many competitors for that,
but that was one of the absolute worst.
Um, but it didn't come outta nowhere, that recommendation.
Um, there has been concerns and, um, petitions and marches
and letters since the mid 1990s, um,
in New Zealand and
for at least a decade earlier in Europe about, um,
about pig farming, intensive pig farming.
And, um, the various practices it entails
and the freedoms it, um, removes.
So, um, the pork industry has had a very long time
to get the heads around this.
The writing has been on the wall for a very long time,
and it's completely disingenuous of them to claim
that they're not ready now when they have had, um, decades,
about 30 years to prepare.
Um, they cannot assume that they just have a sort
of a God given right to continue this lifestyle.
That their children can also be big pharmacists.
They have, you know, many, many, um, professions, um,
disappear times change, um, attitudes change.
Um, there's probably many posties out there who wanted
for their children to be able to posties as well.
And guess what, it's not happening.
Um, but that doesn't fly as a reason.
Um, half, half we are given to understand half of the, um,
farms in New Zealand no longer use, um, so crates.
Um, so what is this saying to the, to the ones that are,
you know, have, um, been clamoring to the, um, to the,
um, industry or to this group,
the primary production committee saying, um,
we can't organize ourselves in time,
and what does it say about them in terms of their,
their their, um, um, I, I don't think that failure
to repair should, should get them off the hook.
Um, they can just scrabble to,
to make those changes and close down.
Um, if needs be for the time that it takes, what is, um,
you know, why should, why should everybody else who did
what they were told to do, um, be penalized?
Um, so yeah, that's, um, I have that particular concern.
I know that, um, in, in, in the nineties, I remember
specifically that, um,
the 1999 Animal Welfare Act was supposed to provide a sort
of a, um, a vehicle
through which the concerns about the pig industry would be,
uh, addressed through the code development process.
Um, but that didn't happen
because the code development process was, um, in the,
in the view of many fairly rapidly captured by the industry
who, who write their codes now.
Um, so that didn't work.
And, and there's been various other incarnations and,
and now we have, you know, the 19th, 2020, um, uh, change
and now we are going to, um, just cancel that, um,
because a few farmers are bleeding.
Um, well, that's how it appears to me anyway.
Uh, okay.
Um, so, um, that is probably my main, my main concern.
I just, um, felt in the commentary on this proposed bill
that there was not enough, um, attention given to the fact
that this has been around for a very, very, very long time.
Um, concerns have been expressed, um, um, yeah, by many,
many people over a very long period.
It's not, you know, it is not a new thing for the poor.
That's about it. Thank you,
Bridget. That's great.
Um, questions, members, just, um,
we've got about a minute left for Bridgette if, if
anyone's got questions.
No. Bridget, there appear to be no
questions for my members this morning.
Thank you so much for your time.
Grateful for your time. You have a lovely day.
Okay, you too. Thank you. Bye-bye.
Yeah, Cheerio. Bye bye.
We now move across to Dana Mumford,
Uh, Mr. Chair. Dana
isn't online yet.
Uh, and neither is the, is Cody
who will be the last for the day.
Are these the last ones for the day?
Yes, but, uh, however, they're not,
What We can do is we can hang around for five Dana
and or Cody if you like.
Sure. Would you like to suspend
the meeting until they're online? Yeah.
Do you mind? Just so everyone can off and grab. All
Right, thanks.
Thank you.
Go do some work, man.
What are you doing?